PRADHAN MANTRI KISAN SAMMAN NIDHI (PM-KISAN)
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
Government of India

SCHEME OVERVIEW:
---------------
PM-KISAN is a Central Sector scheme with 100% funding from Government of India. The Scheme is effective from 1.12.2018. Under the Scheme an income support of Rs.6000/- per year is provided to all farmer families across the country in three equal installments of Rs.2000/- each every four months.

OBJECTIVES:
----------
1. To provide income support to all landholding farmers' families having cultivable land.
2. To supplement financial needs of farmers for procuring various inputs related to agriculture and allied activities as well as domestic needs.
3. To ensure farmer welfare by direct income support.

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
-------------------
1. All landholding farmers' families, which have cultivable landholding in their names.
2. Farmer's family is defined as a family comprising of husband, wife and minor children who own cultivable land as per land records of the concerned State/UT.
3. The following categories of farmers are NOT eligible:
   a) Institutional land holders
   b) Farmer families holding constitutional posts
   c) Serving or retired officers and employees of State/Central Government as well as PSUs and Government autonomous bodies
   d) Persons who paid Income Tax in the last assessment year
   e) Professionals like Doctors, Engineers, Lawyers, Chartered Accountants, etc.
   f) Pensioners drawing monthly pension of Rs.10,000/- or more

BENEFIT:
-------
Financial benefit of Rs. 6,000/- per annum per family payable in three equal installments of Rs. 2,000/- each, every four months.

EXCLUSIONS:
----------
If a landholder farmer family has one or more of the following exclusion criteria, then they shall not be eligible for benefit under the scheme:
1. All Institutional Land holders
2. Farmer families in which one or more members is among the following:
   a. Former and present Ministers/State Ministers and former/present Members of Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha/State Legislative Assemblies/State Legislative Councils, former and present Mayors of Municipal Corporations, former and present Chairpersons of District Panchayats.
   b. All serving or retired officers and employees of Central/State Government Ministries /Offices/Departments and its field units, Central or State PSEs and Attached offices /Autonomous Institutions under Government as well as regular employees of the Local Bodies (Excluding Multi-Tasking Staff /Class IV/Group D employees)
   c. All superannuated/retired pensioners whose monthly pension is Rs.10,000/-or more (Excluding Multi-Tasking Staff / Class IV/Group D employees)
   d. All Persons who paid Income Tax in last assessment year
   e. Professionals like Doctors, Engineers, Lawyers, Chartered Accountants, and Architects registered with Professional bodies and carrying out profession by undertaking practices.

APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
--------------------
1. Identification of beneficiaries is the responsibility of State/UT Governments.
2. The lists of eligible beneficiaries would be published at the village level.
3. The funds are directly transferred to the bank accounts of the beneficiaries.
4. Farmers can also self-register through the PM-KISAN Portal.

DOCUMENTS REQUIRED:
-----------------
1. Land Records
2. Aadhaar Card
3. Bank Account details
4. Mobile Number
5. Self-declaration that they are not excluded under the exclusion criteria

IMPORTANT DATES:
--------------
The installment periods are as follows:
1. 1st Installment: 1st April to 31st July
2. 2nd Installment: 1st August to 30th November
3. 3rd Installment: 1st December to 31st March

HELPLINE:
--------
For any queries related to PM-KISAN Scheme, farmers can contact:
Toll-Free Number: 1800-11-5526
PM-KISAN Helpdesk: 011-23381092, 011-23382401

WEBSITE:
-------
For more information, please visit: https://pmkisan.gov.in/

DISCLAIMER:
----------
This document is for informational purposes only. The actual implementation of the scheme may vary based on current government guidelines. Farmers are advised to check the official PM-KISAN website for the latest information. 